The following are thoughts I wrote every day of the past week just before I went to bed.  These are transcribed exactly from a notebook where I handwrote them.  These are unedited, rough thoughts yet to be developed. 

----

*5/11/20*

A criticism of my Heidegger essay that an anon brought up had to do with my use of zuhandenheit as a stand-in with the mode of being/consciousness associated with it.  I used the word "consciousness" and I think his criticism of it was essentially that Heidegger's notions of zuhandenheit and vorhandenheit are pre-ontological and precede (supercede?) any notions of "consciousness".  That objects revealing themselves to us as one way or another cannot really be analysed in the context of "modes of consciousness" because zu/vorhandenheit are more basic than any notions of perceptions being imposed on the world.  That "conscioussness" or "perception" are terms that presuppose a subject-object distinction.  So does the term "mode of being", because this supposes that some subject *is* (a mode).  But following this same logic, isn't the notion that *we* encounter equipment also supposing a subject-object distinction?  I now think that the interpretation that zu/vorhandenheit are "modes that objects reveal themselves to us" are flawed and incongruous with what Heidegger intended in his project.  Zu/vorhandenheit *just are*.


*5/12/20 - Modes of Thought*

I'm pretty exhausted so I won't write much today.  Anyway, I'll continue it tomorrow night and the night after until at the end of the week I'll compile what I write into a single post.  Maybe I'll title it "Before I Sleep" or "Miscellenea 1".

While using Heideggerian language may have been a mistake in terms of communicability, the core of the ideas I still believe are valid.  Generally, that philosophy should be seen through the lens of "modes".  Philosophy itself is a practive in adopting and emulating modes of thought.  And that one project or another cannot be understoof and integrated without surrendering completely all previously learned modes, and leaping into faith in the new mode (belief in all knowledge and particularly philosophy is at its core predicated upon one's faith).  Seemingly contradictory philosophies resting upon seemingly contradictory premises can both be "true", in the sense that their associated modes are each valid, consistent, sound, predictive, etc.  Contradictions internal to modes (generally) ought not to be tolerated, but contradictions between modes are what result when people view the contents of a philosophy associated with a foreign mode through the lens of a mode they are familiar with.  This is not to say that they are using their familiar *philosophy* to judge another but that the mode they inhabit when thinking about their native philosophy is completely seperate from the mode associated with an "opposing" philosophy, so the opposing philosophy as understood by its associated mode is incomprehensible when under the mode of an opposing philosophy.  Philosophies cannot be completely understood until one's native mode is completely ceded and the new mode adopted, often spending an extended periods emulating before adoption can be achieved.  New modes are only truly ever invented when one has successfully realised and integrated multiple distinct mdoes and new philosophies are drawn up after associate philosophies are understood in full.  This is the true meaning of synthesis.  A trap that too many fall into is adopting one mode and judging other philosophies (which are associated with other modes) through that lens.  And while they may develop the philosophies within their native mode, they will never achieve the kind of synthesis that drives forawrd the dialectic.  The most important act in the *practice* of philosophy is the integration of many modes.  Integration, as in that vertical integration, thoroughly permeating all layers of cognition.  An irreversable shift, piercing down the layers of the cortex and limbic system paving a bidirectional highway in its wake.  Philosophy is not the practice of memorising philosophies.


*5/13/20*

I would like to talk about "modes of being" (colloquially, states of consciousness, mooods, etc.), and I would like to integrate Heidegger's zu/vorhandenheit, but again I'm running into the problem that zuhandenheit cannot cannot be reconciled with a distinction that presumes a subject.  But at the same time, I don't see why it can't be said that being in a "flow state" causes objects to reveal themseleves to us ready to hand.  I guess it boils down to what I wrote a couple days ago, that readiness to hand *just is*, there are no objects.  Here I am running into the problem of two irreconcilable modes: that associated with the standard, Cartesian subject-object distinctions, and that associated with Heideggerian ontology (at least, I *think* they're irreconcilable).  I think the problem I'm having is actually a problem the vast majority of people have (without realising) when interpreting Heidegger's ontology: using the Cartesian view to analyse readiness to/presence at hand; a new term is necessary when using "readiness to hand" to describe *objects* revealing themselves *to us*.  A term for when we misuse "ready to hand" by using it in a context which presumes the Cartesian view.  Perhaps I'll use the word, "transparency".  I also need a term for the mode of being associated with the "flow-state that avoids any scientific associations, but I'm too tired to do that today.


*5/14/20 - The Practice of Philosophy*

I think I'll take a little detour from "modes" today, at least initially.  I'll talk about the act of creation.  Philosophy is not the pursuit of "truth", a term thrown around but never definitively defined.  In fact I don't think it's possible to define it in words similarly to words like "consciousness" or "being".  These words without definitons should never be used in contexts that require them to be define.  They have menaing, largely in the sense that they can be alluded to by highlighting what they *are not*, but it is much harder to pinpoint what they *are*.  Words without definitions should be used when attempting to convey the ineffable.  They shoudl be used in passing, orbiting the point to increase the likelihood that the reader takes the leap into understanding.  Never should be uttered the phrase, "truth is" or "consciousness is".  Not only does it not make sense, but it reduces the whole to an infinitesimal slice.

This talk about "using words" brings me to what I originally planned to talk about: words and ideas are to be *used*, as a painter uses color or a sculpture uses a chisel.  Indeed, philosophy is building and chiselling.  Continuous refinement to best convey the ineffable.  A good philosophy must be grounded, attached to preexisting concepts, but not too grounded.  Too attached to preexisting philosophies and it becomes just words on paper.  This is the phenomena seen when the "over-read" intellectual cites everything he can, uses the format, style, lexicon of the dogma to produce somehting that is nothing.  Words on paper.  If not purely posturing, then saying something so superficial that while it may be "true" within the area of study, the underlying current of the conscious and the mode associated with the philosophy are untouched.  Too abstract withouth a ground, in some attempt to capture the perfection of a thought, and the philosophy is incomprehensible and practically meaningless.  Good, true philosophy strikes the balance which allows it to convey meaning not just superficially, but ineffably, at a level that reshapes and synthesises new modes.  It is not too different from a good painting: at its surface is the literal representation (what's being painted, what the words are literally saying), beneath that is what is open to explicit interpretation, at the core is the ineffeable.

Philosophies should be approached like paintings hung in the museum of ideas called philosophy.  Philosophy is not useless, it is useful in the same effort as art in shaping the cultural imagination.

Just like any other art, philosophy requires practice.  Many people spend so long studying the techniques and the ideas, that they don't get any practice.  These people become the curators of The Museum, aggragating works via citation to exhibit in their papers, and keeping intact pieces deemed valuable.  But these curators do not have their works exhibited in The Museum.  Future curators won't be exhibiting the exhibits of curators, they'll exhibit the works of the artists.


*5/15/20*

Feel like shit right now, mostly because its the first time in a long time that I've been awake so long on 6 hours of sleep (which used to be no sweat, but I've acclimated to 8+ during quarantine).  Having a hard time thinking of what to write, but here goes it:

What seperates modes of thought from modes of being?  Are they not both mental "states" (I feel like I should use a different word than "mental" or "cognitive", too many scientific and psychological associations---speaking of which, I ought to talk about the scientific mode of thought and its reconciliation with philosophical modes).  In some sense, both are cognitive modes which shape our thought, but only modes of being influence how we encounter objects in the world (among other things).  Modes of being are much broader, much cognitively deeper.  Take that transparent mode which allows transparency of equipment and dissolution of the ego.  Now say someone is writing an essay while in the transparent mode of being with a very weak distinction of "self", in more colloquial/scientific terms, the flow state.  Despite a largely dissolved ego, lack of awareness of the page or pen, the essayist still thinks explicit thoughts while inhabiting a mode of thought.  And in any mode of being that allows explicit thought, the thinke is not limited in the mode of thought they may inhabit.  Modes of being and modes of thought are distinct phenomena, but this is not to say they do not influence each other---obviously they have immense influence over each other.  Particularly the mode of thought's influence over the mode of being.


*5/16/20*

Just spent about 3 hours watching Evangelion and I am very tired, don't have much time to write before I sleep.  Also I don't really have much to write about, I grasped something interesting for a moment but once I continued watching I forgot about it.  Anyway, I guess I should start:

Adopting a mode of thought allows one to independently derive the implications of an associated philosophy from minimal explicit knowledge of its premises.  Of course, the core premises must be understood---not just known, but integrated.  Understanding is integration of the ineffable.  Understand the core and the rest follows.  This is not just to say that the rest of a philosophy is derived *logically* per se, it is much more than that.  It is the internalisation of the logic inherent to the mode of thought.  Inhabiting a mode of thought not only allows one to determine what logically follows but allows one to determine new premises that do not follow "logically" in any traditional sense.  Once a mode is internalised, it allows for the generation of an associated philosophy.  Thus the creation of philsophy is not an explicit act but it is the act of making explicit all that falls into place once a mode of thought is internalised.  The more closely one is able to emulate and adopt a thinker's mode of thought, the more accurately they can generate a philosophy analogous to that of the thinker.


*5/17/20*

Modes come into play with all forms of art, not just philosophy.  (Modes of being/thought are always present, but I'm talking about a distinct mode for art).  Particularly with movies and TV I find that being able to adopt the mode associated with the movie or series is necessary to "get it".  Going into a movie with any predetermining mode bars the viewer from appreciateing the work.  Sometimes I find that I'll initially enjoy a movie because I'm drawn into it, in a transparency mode of being where the work is just experienced without judgement, but later I'll find that the movie has been deemed a bad movie.  Genuinely bad movies are those that bar the viewer from absorption.  Even if something within a show is cliche or normally banal from my default mode, if that cliche is made profound in a manner consistent with the mode then it is profound in the moment.  Perhaps "great" movies (and all "great" art) are deignated so because of their abuility to absorb the viewer into the associated mode while possessing explicitly complex and "profound" themes when judged via a critical mode.  I don;t quite know what to call this mode that is associated with artforms other than philosophy, and I'm not sure whether it can be called a mode of thought.  Mode of thought are a foundation for thinking, but absorption into art is more of an implicit, "transparent" mode of being than the "detached observer" mode of being associated with thinking.

-something to be said about modes when playing with children and "leveling" with them/leveling with other people, but I'm too tired for it right now
