---
hidden: true
---

***This post is actually terrible and cringe, you have been warned (and I don't even mean this in an attention grabbing way, it's really a gross misinterpretation of Heidegger)***

Seems like I can't finish a thought before moving on.  Maybe it's a good thing, a sign I'm still learning, my views still rapidly changing and amorphous.  Or maybe it's that postmodern thing where people continually shift from one narrative to another and confuse it for personal development.  I guess there's something to be said about the artist (in the broadest sense, including philosophers, artisans, anything that requires ongoing refinement of skills or projects) in postmodernity.  If individuals can't stick to one narrative for any extended period, how is anyone supposed to develop a grand creative project?  

Anyway, here's what I was planning to post: 

------

The ultimate state of experience is the flow state. In Heideggarian terms, readiness to hand (Usually Zuhandenheit and Vorhandenheit are terms used in the context of encountering "equipment", but here I mean only the mode of consciousness associated with these distinctions).  The state of unconscious experience, one of integration.  It is the state sought by experienced meditators, artists and artisans at work, athletes in practice, musicians in play, lovers in love, and psychedelic drug users.  It is a dissolution of the ego and the dissolution of the barrier between the conscious and the unconscious.  Both the terms "flow-state" and "Zuhandenheit" (readiness to hand) refer to a same general state of unconsciousness, and though I may use both interchangeably to refer to this state, I prefer to use Heidegger's terminology as I think it is a more general notion than "flow", a term usually used in scientific contexts (the distinction between contexts is an important distinction, and one I think many philosophical texts fail to clarify.  It is expecially common with the intrusion of scientific concepts into philosophy.  The problem of declaring contexts and perspectives is a topic I won't get into here).  

It is a pure state of experience beyond emotion and thinking.  It is the divine: the transcendental experience.  Or overwhelming beauty.  In many contexts, it is an ideal.  The highest state of being in many contexts is one which maximises the time spent in this state of being: Buddhist enlightenment, mastery of a craft: the image of the creator lost in his craft, toiling without eating as dawn turns to dusk and dusk to dawn; Schopenhauer's transcendence through aesthetic experience, Maslow's self actualisation, Jung's integration of the psyche, the divine experience.  Not only is achieving Zuhandenheit the pinnacle of human experience, the greatest human feats and creations are those produced while in this state.  All great art, great ideas and inventions, great feats of athleticism.  

A fulfilling life is one of unconscious action, not anxious analysis.   In other words, readiness-to-hand over presence-at-hand (Vorhandenheit) (which is characterised by detached observation and analysis).  To use the classic example, a person using a hammer to hammer a nail is not aware of the hammer but is simply doing: in some sense his whole being is engrossed in the task, and there is no self or tool---only action.  Only when the head of the hammer breaks off does he come to and think of the hammer in explicit terms---as a detached subject distinct from the object---as he attempts to get the head reattached.  (And indeed, cognitive/neuroscience has come to support this view of tool use.  There is also something to be said about the psychedelic experience, ego death, and Zuhandenheit.  Of the often reported "being one with the universe", the dissolution of the border between subject and object).  In line with the aforementioned idealisation of the ready-to-hand mode, it is true that those most satisfied with their lives are those most able to spend their lives ready-to-hand.  For example, the self-actualised artist (artist in the broadest sense).  But this is not only true with the enlightened Buddhist or the master, it is the man so born into his society that he drifts through the respectible life ready-to-hand.  Such a thorough ingrouper that his social relations and relation with himself is ready-to-hand---this is the normie that Rival Voices wrote about (https://autisticmercury.com/2020/02/19/vorhandenheit-und-zuhandenheit/).

We can begin to view Vorhandenheit and Zuhandenheit in the context of Marx's theory of alienation when we realise the association between anxiety and Vorhandenheit, alienation and the absence of Zuhandenheit (note: modes are not a binary between vor/zuhanden, and relevant here is "unreadiness to hand", that is, obstruction of readiness to hand without the explicit distinction.  For example, the hammer may be too heavy to use, but one does not need the explicit notion of weight to be barred from readiness to hand)  and the association between self actualisation and fulfillment with a life of Zuhandenheit.  Perhaps more accurately than saying that fulfillment is associated with the *amount of time* spent RTH, it is more accurate to think of the mode as being dominant not only temporally, but as a share of overall consciousness or being.  This is because structure of being/consciousness is above the notion of time, which is an observed phenomena.  It's also important to note that one can be RTH while working with PAH explicit notions, that these modes are not mutually exclusive as normally interpreted.  A mathematician who is hard at work may be ready to hand and nearly unconscious as he scrawls pages of calculation.  But nonetheless, at some level of being he is manipulating explicit mathematical notions which are associated with the PAH mode of being.  Thus while RTH dominates, RTH and PAH coexist.

When one works a bleak job that inhibits their actualisation, it is at some level interpreted as a defect, so like in the example of the broken hammer, the worker is inhibited from being ready to hand in one way or another.  This unreadiness to hand is not usually pure presence to hand, save for the few times one is actually analysing one's trajectory and explicitly planning an escape, but it's usually daydreaming or clock-gazing.  In the few instances one is purely present at hand, it is the sort of rumination that arises to direct oneself toward a state of readiness to hand.  Unreadiness to hand in this context is a signal, a bouy that says "I need to get the fuck out of here".  This happens more often than not when people are working jobs that are essentially nonproductive, and at some level they know it.  Unreadiness to hand with ones work is alienation from one's work.

Then, whatever product (or usually service) the worker contributes to producing to some indiscernable degree is produced in the unready to hand mode, not individually, but collectively.  A mode of collective unreadiness and presence at hand where individuals contribute to collectives which mechanically produce commodities and services, compelled by market competition and the essence of technology, and the allure towards growth without end for its own sake.  This is alienation from the product.  These products are not only alienating to the worker who produces them unready to hand, but they are alienating to the consumer.  Products of artists (including artisans and craftsman) carry the essence of a work produced ready to hand; in their production, the boundary between the artist and the work dissapears.  It is telling that in a world of alienating and disposable items, the work of an artist sticks out like a sore thumb.  The tea set sitting next to me, hand made in Japan and given to me as a gift from a family member, becomes the centerpiece on my particleboard desk next to the plastic monitor and keyboard.  The tea set created by an individual readiness to hand carries with it an inherent weight that does not exist in products created by collective unreadiness/presence at hand.  The artist is reflected in his art, and out of empathy, instinct, and beauty the owner is compelled to care for it.  There is also something to be said about the sentimentality that develops for alienating products when one exercises their own artistry on them, such as when they are repaired instead of replaced.

In our alienation from others, social interactions become strained and present at hand.  This goes without saying; interactions are conscious games of molding the correct mask depending on the situation, self regulation and censorship, especially with people we are not close with.  And now, the number of people with whom one can be ready to hand with (possibly, but not necessarily, people they're close with) is a scant handful if even that---often it's none.  This social disconnect is not only characterised by presence at hand, but it is caused by the intersection of collective presence at hand and the enframing mode of revealing that has grown since the invention of more efficient means of communication (printing press, internet) and the advent of industrial society.  

------

And then I planned to talk about some of the following:

- enframing is intimately connected to presence at hand, and the rise to of collective presence at hand over collective readiness to hand is largely due to the rise of the enframing mode of revealing

- localism maximises collective readiness to hand in social situations (and that collective RtH is only possible in small communities) and thus localism is necessary in an ideal society

- maybe connect this to early 19th century America and petty commodity mode of production

- talk about alienation from species essence in terms of presence at hand being "farther away" from the essence of dasein, and readiness is a far more natural mode for dasein

- talk about what a collectively ready to hand society looks like

- "If there is an "end of history" as a penultimate development of consciousness it is [collective readiness to hand], and supposing that the end of history is a sort of eternal recurrence, with deviations from that optimum bound to arrive back at the end, it seems fitting that the end will be a return to pre-ontological consciousness.  The end of history is the beginning.  That which predates history as a form of ontological reflection, a present at hand practice."

I'll probably continue this sometime later, but the pressure to continue has killed my motivation and frankly, I'm getting bored of it.  I think I'll try writing aphorisms for the time being.
