My knowledge of algebra, category theory, and linguistics is cursory at best, but I found an interesting way to think about language in mathematical terms. This idea is by no means well developed, but here is the outline:

The set consisting of an alphabet and all of its combinations and concatenations (STR) is a free monoid with respect to concatenation if we define a null character (ε) as its identity element.

An alphabet is a subset (ALP) of STR. STR is finitely generated by ALP, since STR is the result of applying concatenation to ALP.

The set of all phonemes and their concatenations (PHO), the set of all morphemes and their concatenations (MOR), and the set of all words and their concatenations (LEX) are all subsets of STR. LEX is a subset of MOR, MOR is a subset of PHO. Further, PHO, MOR, and LEX, with respect to concatenation and with ε as their identity element, are submonoids of STR. PHO, MOR, LEX are all finitely generated.

There exist (surjective?) endomorphisms from STR to PHO, PHO to MOR, MOR to LEX, STR to MOR, STR to LEX, PHO to LEX.

Categorically, we can think of each monoid as a category with a single object with the concatenation of elements as their morphisms (which are categorical endomorphisms) and the identity morphism being ε. We can imagine the endomorphisms from monoids to their submonoids as functors between categories. Alternatively, STR, PHO, MOR, LEX can be thought of as the objects of a “category of language”, with morphisms between objects being the endomorphisms from monoids to their submonoids and the elements of each monoid as respective identity morphisms.

LEX describes arbitrary concatenation of words, but we need to define the rules of syntax to have a language. I don't know how to do this yet, but I briefly skimmed a paper (Recursive Categorical Syntax and Morphology I by Michael Brame) that attempts to define an algebra for syntax. I'll probably try to adopt his methods into my categorical framework of language in the future. Luckily, my thoughts are more focused on the morphological side of things while Brame is more syntactic, so my ideas should merge well with his. Eventually I hope to have a complete “category of language” which comprehensively covers morphology and syntax.
