(this was originally meant to be much longer and comprehensive, but I got lazy and just finished it abruptly because I'd never finish it otherwise)

<br/>
The Problem With Foundations
 
Set theory as a foundation of mathematics has been a contentious issue since its inception.  Notable objections were those of the Constructivists, Henri Poincare, and Ludwig Wittgenstein, among others.  I will not go into any of these objections, but instead I present an objection to the very notion of a foundation of mathematics as traditionally defined.  
 
Some notable projects to create foundations other than set theory attempt to use higher category theory or type theory.  If we define a "foundation of mathematics" as a widely applicable framework for mathematics, then there is not much of a problem of a foundation and it doesn't really matter which foundation is used.  With this view, the axioms of various foundations are not "true foundations" in the sense that mathematics necessitates their existence, but they are accepted for their applicability.  But if the "foundation of mathematics" is thought of as a set of base axioms which give rise to all mathematics, then we run into some problems.  
 
Higher mathematics such as abstract algebra and analysis existed decades to hundreds of years before Cantor invented set theory.  The historical argument goes that if higher mathematics existed and developed so long without Cantor's set theory, then mathematics would continue to develop just fine without it.  The mathematics did not necessitate the existence of Cantor's set theory.  Instead, it is a convenient tool.  From a sociological perspective, there is the fact that in order to learn any of these foundations of mathematics, one needs to have quite a repertoire of prior mathematics education.  You don't start learning the ZFC axioms before you learn to count.  This alone suggests that counting, arithmetic, elementary algebra, etc. are necessary for set theory to exist, not the other way around.  In this sense, set theory is akin to abstract algebra in its a posteriori approach.  
 
It seems then that the true foundation of mathematics, from which all other mathematics is derived, should be natural numbers and arithmetic.  But these notions themselves are abstractions.  Animals do not need to have formalised concepts of quantity or relational operators to know that one food source is more bountiful than another.  Toddlers do not need to have a concept of "natural numbers" or even "arithmetic" to know how to count or perform basic arithmetic operations.  All of mathematics is itself a formalisation of a logic that is innate to the mind.  
 
Noumena gives rise to phenomena.  More specifically, whatever "thing in itself" underlies the mind gives rise to phenomenal experience.  Sciences generally attempt to formally model noumena, but their project is phenomenal and can only ever be an image, an approximation of noumenal objects.  Neuroscience models the noumena of the mind---that noumena which give rise to phenomena.  So in this sense, the philosophical concept of mind and the neuroscientific concepts of the neuron, neural networks, and the brain, all reference the same underlying noumenon.  In the noumena underlying the mind exists an "innate logic".  Since innate logic is noumenal the very coinage of the term seems nonsensical, since it seems to impose phenomenal judgements upon a noumenon.  But this is not the case.  The term "innate logic" is not meant to describe the noumenon, but instead serves to characterise the phenomena predicated upon its existence.  "Innate" describes the existence of a noumenon underlying the mind (or neuron, neural network, or what have you), and "logic" implies this noumenon's association with the mind's logical faculty (while "mind" is a term usually used exclusively for humans, here it also applies to animals).  From a scientific perspective, innate logic manifests as an emergent phenomenon of neural networks.  More specifically (again, from a scientific/mathematical perspective), both biological and artificial neural networks serve to optimise a "cost" function, but the details don't matter here.  The point is the universality of innate logic underlying all biological neural networks.  This is why innate logic can manifest in animals making logical decisions.
 
The phenomenal is a blanket hovering above the noumenal.  Just as noumena cannot be described, the connection between the phenomenal and noumenal cannot be described.  Here is where we encounter the issue with foundations: innate logic is noumenal, and just as innate logic itself cannot be described, the connection between innate logic and mathematics cannot be described.  
 
Mathematics is built upon definitions, the most basic of which are the most direct representations of innate logic.  Currently, I am not certain which definitions comprise these "base definitions" (or whether “base definitions” can be determined), so the following is a work-in-progress.  But some of the most likely candidates seem to be basic quantity and basic relational operations (e.g. less than, greater than).  "Quantity" does not mean "numbers", for quantities can be compared without the notion of numbers.  A toddler will learn to judge relative quantities before they are able to count (e.g. "Which is more?").  Numbers are defined when we more closely examine quantities (or numbers may well be base definitions, I'm not sure).  And I have not yet parsed whether arithmetic is basal.  If it is, then I expect addition to be the only base definition of arithmetic.  All other arithmetic operations are derived from addition: subtraction is its inverse ("inverse" itself is a definition), multiplication is repeated addition, division is its inverse, exponentiation is repeated multiplication, logarithms are an inverse, and so on.  For our sake the specifics do not matter.  What matters to us is that some definitions naturally follow from innate logic and that definitions begin to form a hierarchy of abstraction.
 
Definitions package preexisting structure into single terms or ideas.  This reduction that definitions provide is the meaning of "abstraction".  While it is true that definitions rely on preexisting structure, they often add new structure, creating the possibility for new "games".  For example, defining the notion of "variables" allows for algebra, but the definition of "variable" is only partially related to the definition of "number": the idea of an object in place of a number is completely foreign and undefined within the frame of "numbers and arithmetic".  You can spend an eternity doing arithmetic and the notion of a variable will never arise until you step back and think, "what if I designate X to *represent* a number".  Similarly, the notion of a "set" was defined as "a collection of distinct objects"; the properties of sets, cardinality, functions between sets, etc. were characterised, and set theory was born.  But numerous paradoxes, the most famous being Russell’s paradox, quickly compromised its integrity, so set theory was axiomatised to “fix” these problems.  Axiomatisation is always dependent on preexisting structure (the word itself, to axiomatise, necessitates an object).  These axioms are not the source of all mathematics as they are often misconstrued, but they are instead a set of parameters within which sets and mathematics with sets is defined.  
 
So what sets axioms apart from definitions? And why aren’t definitions a foundation of mathematics?  Axioms differ from definitions in that they are justifications/parametrisations of preexisting structure.  Definitions do not seek to *justify* preexisting structure, but instead simply *characterise* structures and create new structure.  None of these are true foundations because they are either dependent on the preexistence of mathematical structure, or in the case of base definitions (those closest to innate logic (i.e. least abstracted)), they are derived from innate logic (i.e. The structure of logic itself is a phenomenal manifestation of innate logic and cannot be justified with logical proof).  And since innate logic is noumenal, it cannot be described or inquired into.  In some sense, from a bird’s eye view, the “foundation” of all of mathematics and logic is innate logic.  But it is a “foundation” in the same sense that all phenomena arise from noumena.  There is no *phenomenal* foundation of mathematics, and nearly every definition of a “foundation” is phenomenal.  
 
 

<br/> 
Side note: Causation
 
The causal link is also derived from innate logic.  All “minds” (using the broadest definition of the word, encompassing all neural networks) “perceive” (in the broadest sense possible) the causal link.  This is why causality is said to be apriori.
