We used to live in the world.  In God's world.  The trees you felled to build your house, furnish it, heat it.  The forest that yields game, the fertile Earth that yields fruit.  All for the taking, respectfully receiving the gifts of God.  The beauty of God's world so reverential that there is no question that it is real.  A sunset can strip away all abstract notions of the world so that all that is left is pure being, the absence of ego in the presence of overwhelming beauty, the divine.

This is religion in its purest sense, or rather, the narrativisation of the sublime as divine, the world as God's world, gratitude for the gifts of the world.  Pure religion is narrativisation of being and being in the world before it relates to power.  It is pre-ideological, it is a most basal abstraction of *just being*.  It is an abstraction insofar that all formalisations of perception into language is abstraction from just being.  But despite this, the pre-ideological narrativisation of being and the world presupposes a pre-ontological understanding of being and the world, an understanding of these as boundless, and that the words that narrativise these are merely signs rather than definitions (as definitions set bounds).  Such basal formalisation of being can be considered real, and even more real is the pre-ontological understanding and pure being.

We used to live in the real.  Imagine you live in 18th century America.  You've found a nice spot on the edge of a forest to settle.  You fell the trees to build and furnish your house, and once it's built, you fell some more to heat it.  There is no doubt that this is real.  There are no abstractions, a tree is a tree, there's nothing more to felling them than just doing it.  In the act you are just being, and when it's done you thank God.  Compare this to renting a home and paying your utilities so that you can heat your home.  Just this sentence alone is abstract in comparison to the above example.  It's implied that you must find a job, work for money so that you can pay the rent and the bills so that a million implicit processes work so that you can live in a heated home.  What does any of this mean to the 18th century settler who just fells trees to accomplish the same thing?  

With the industrial revolution we have drawn away from God's world, we have abstracted.  Materially, His gifts transmuted beyond recognition.  The relinquishment of autonomy such that we as individuals no longer reap the fruits of the Earth and build, but these fruits are now only the first step in an infinite series of transformations too complex to understand.  The result of this on our understanding of the material world is that objects exist without a root, or their connection to their roots only exist to us as free floating abstractions.  Even our most basic needs now only exist to us as abstractions.  Take the above example, our modern percepts for "housing" and "heating" (the modern meaning of these words are completely different from the settler's understanding).  Immediately, we notice the lack of autonomy over our most basic needs in comparison to the settler.  That these abstractions of our basic needs exert control over us rather than us determining our basic needs ourselves.  In other words, when the settler fells trees he reaps the fruits of the Earth, but the modern abstractions of needs that have replaced the needs themselves somewhat reverse this relationship: we no longer harvest our needs, but (abstractions of) needs harvest from *us*.  Rent or mortgage payments, utilities---these call upon *us*.  This lack of autonomy is one of the chief causes of modern general anxiety.  Another is that since the process by which basic needs are produced and the process by which we acquire them only exist to us as abstractions, our conception of these processes lose definition.  God's world, the real, being, is conceptually intuitive.  Splitting wood to heat your home is conceptually clear, there's no need to think about it.  If you are a working poor unskilled American, imagining how you are going to pay the utility bill is conceptually noisy and uncertain.  This lack of definition and uncertainty in our conceptions of the material world is a second cause of general anxiety.

The process by which food, water, shelter, heat, clothing, etc. are provided for us is so obfuscated that we can no longer say these are the gifts of God.  God did not build the factories and supply chains---we did.  We've built a world away from God's world and God no longer exists in this world.  God is dead, and what killed him is the abstraction of the world and life itself.  


If we define ideology to require some relation to power, then pure religion as outlined above (narrativisation of being, deification of the world, divinization of the sublime) is not ideology, at least initially.  Imagine a peasant watching the sunset after a day in the fields.  Initially he is overwhelmed by the sublime, there is no narrative, just pure being.  Only immediately after the fact does he think that such beauty could only be a gift from God.  This initial narrative is neutral and refers only to some sublime which in this case, gets interpreted/formalized as gratitude.  Such a narrative understands being insofar that for the subject it refers to some experience of pure being (In other words, the subject attempts to narrativise an "experience" of the loss of subjectivity.  Note that "experience" is not used in conjunction with the word "being" in the same way its used otherwise, because otherwise it presupposes an existence of a subject.  Whenever being is mentioned, remember that being "just is").  It only comes to relate to power when the subject is called upon.  When the peasant is called upon to fight in a war, an overarching narrative consumes the former narrative such that the peasant thinks, "I must fight for God's beautiful Earth and sky for which I'm so grateful for".  This is religious ideology (in later ideologies we will see that there is no initial neutrality which is subsumed, but ideology is totalizing.  There is no room to narrativise being).  Religious ideology is zeroth order ideology, it is a form of ideology that has existed since the beginning of civilization.  It is the least abstracted order of ideology in that it is based upon an initial narrativisation of being and the world; some initial real narrative, pure religion, provides the positive narrative that can be perverted to serve some power relation.  Power under zeroth order ideology is obvious and basal.  During the period when zeroth order ideology dominated, there was the widespread understanding of the Great Chain of Being: there is no question of who holds the power, where the lie on the chain, and where you lie in relation.  We will see that as we abstracted from the world, power also abstracted.

The industrial revolution marked the beginning of the end for pure religion.  With the abstraction of the world, the narratives tied to that reality also abstracted.  From the above description of the abstraction of the world it seems like this process is historically materialist, where the increasing complexity of the material world abstracts our conception of it.  This is true, but then what triggered the great abstraction of materiality in the first place but a shift, or abstraction, in the consciousness that generates that materiality?  Both interpretations are correct: the increment by which consciousness abstracted the material world and the increment by which materiality produced the abstraction of consciousness were both initially so infinitely small that there is no distinction between the two.  In mathematics, the idea of a Cauchy sequence captures this well: a sequence of numbers which may initially oscillate wildly converges on a single value as it approaches infinity.  While presently the difference between consciousness and materiality is large and each influences the other in large swings, as we go back in history the two converge to a single "value": being.  The animal "just is", there is no ego, no boundary between self and object.  Experiences of pure being bring us back to such a state where there is no self and object, only being.  To be vaguely scientific (although still maintaining a philosophical mode of thought), it is a regression to precortical "consciousness": the cortex that's been pasted on top of our animal brain is stripped away such that our mode of being is identical to animality (and while I try to avoid scientific analogies when talking about things that are extra-scientific, its interesting to note that fMRI scans of people within the "flow state" indicate exactly that: that cortical activity nearly ceases).  The experience of pure being can be thought of as pre-cortical, and the immediate pure religious narrativisation of being can be thought of as the  individual's cortical interpretation once the cortex is "turned back on".  Ideology is *social* or *collective* narrativisation (and power relations are inherent to social reality), and religious ideology coerces the individual to integrate their individual narrativisation of being into the social narrative.  

With the industrial revolution, the *individual* narratives that reflected the abstracted material world culminated in *collective* narrativisation that was equally abstracted.  In the abstracted world created separate from God's world by the hands of Man, pure being became increasingly rare as our percepts became abstract.  Pure being is only "experienced" when all formal percepts are stripped away.  In the abstracted world there is no room for being (the absolute opposite of abstraction).  The collective narratives, i.e. ideology, that emerged during this period was a stark break from religious ideology in that it no longer had any link back to being as religious ideology did.  Whereas religious ideology was preceded by pure religion (Or perhaps more accurately, had the ability to subsume the individual narrativisations of being of pure religion.  Here there's another chicken and egg problem: does pure religion precede religious ideology or vice versa? Of course the tools for individual narrativisation are learned from the collective, but I'm inclined to say that going back, it's another case of convergence), which was able to narrativise being, this new form of ideology, which we'll designate as *first order ideology*, had no such grounding.  If being is some absolute grounding in the real, the total absence of formalisation and abstraction, then first order ideology is the first time ideology starts to float off from the real.  Subjects under this order may by some fluke experience the sublime, but they lack the ability to narrativise it intuitively like subjects under pure religion, who had words whose reference to being was understood.  Around this same time is when enframing (Gestell) came to dominate.  Under this mode, objects came to reveal themselves as resources "standing reserve".  Under gestell, even people come to view eachother---and themselves---as standing reserve (e.g. "human resources") (I believe this is very related to the concept of reification).  Social relations are instrumentalised and have lost their neutrality.  

The emergence of gestell is an example of the abstraction of our perceptions in accordance with the abstraction of the world.  Whereas God's world was often ready to hand, such that there was no subject and object, but *just being*; *fruits* of the world rather than resources; the abstracted world requires of its *subjects* that they conceptualise *objects* in a manner that upholds the abstracted order.  Without this requirement or *coercion*, the abstracted world would not exist in the first place.  Simply put, and to recap, we live in an abstracted material world (industrial society) which forces our conceptions of the world to be abstractions; but the reverse is also true: our abstract conceptions of the world actively uphold the abstract material world.  Again the theme of divergence is relevant: with time, what was once unified as pure being split into the subject object dichotomy.  It should be noted that this dichotomy is not to be attributed to any particular thinker (e.g. Descartes) or shift in the philosophical tradition, but that this split became inherent to social reality as a result of the abstraction of the world, and that the tradition only came to reflect this (reaching a critical break with early modern philosophy).  Individual narrativisation and inquiry itself eventually leads to this dichotomy (the Greeks may have understood being better than we do but they still presuppose the dichotomy), it is in no way exclusively post-industrial.  But this divergence between subject and object exploded leading up to and following the industrial revolution because it was driven by the increasing abstraction of the world (materially and perceptually/conceptually)[^[1]].  Where the peasant at some point was primarily "just being in the world", at some point that peasant came to be primarily "anxious" when faced with the abstract world (refer back to the fourth paragraph).  Recall the thought that goes into heating one's home today over when it was a matter of splitting logs.  This kind of thought or "anxiety" is inherently an opposition: e.g. you versus the utility companies; and this opposition necessarily splits being into subject and object.  This opposition does not exist when you're felling trees, it is not you versus the forest; if it even comes to mind at all (i.e. if there even is a "you" and the forest) the forest is a gift.  

Under first order ideology and gestell, art and other associates of the sublime are instrumentalised.  An obvious form of such instrumentalisation is propaganda, "art" which propagates and reifies the narratives which uphold the abstract order.  To "make real" (a "real" which has supplanted the absolute real which is being) the abstract collective narratives.  Compare this to art under pure religion or to some extent zeroth order ideology.  "Art for art's sake", for the sublime, and by extension the narrativisation of the sublime that is the divine, was still possible.  It served no reifying function, but acheived the just opposite: if being and the sublime are the absolute real, art served to enshrine this real.  A subtler instrumentalisation of art and beauty and the being it enshrines is its function of an "escape".  Being and the world are so absent from our lives that they must be compartmentalised into convenient time slots (e.g. a day at the art museum, fifteen minutes of meditation) which satiate us just enough so that we can return to our anxious and alienated stations.  If being was imbued in our crafts and if we lived in the world like we once did there would be no drive for "art for relief's sake".  One of the most egregious bastardisations of being under gestell and to uphold industry is recent pushes for "mindfulness meditation", inspired by some bastardised image of Eastern meditation.  The idea is to just "let go" of every thought (that arises from a deeper sickness), don't think, just escape for a few minutes so that you can get back to work without those pesky "thoughts".  And not only is the world standing reserve for industry but it is standing reserve as some "leisure resource".  Natural beauty, what was once God's world, reduced to an amusement park, an escape.  Not sublime in its own right, but "for fun".

The power that first order ideology upholds, i.e. power post industrial revolution, has abstracted alongside the world it dominates.  And just like our amorphous conceptions of this world, our understanding of the power which is tied to that world has become equally muddled.  When there was a Great Chain of Being, power was a linear hierarchy, easily conceptualised.  With the abstraction of the world as industrialisation and division of labor, proliferation of supply chains, creation and expansion of the liberal state, etc., power became distributed.  It is a distributed mass, a static noise whose signals are only extracted through ideological narratives.  Ideological narratives create structure from the noise but never quite capture its entirety.  There is a sense that these narratives are true, but each only captures a slice of the near infinite signals when they attempt to systemise and point out power.  Power is a subject so well trodden that I'd be a fool to create my own system, but what's relevant here is that power has abstracted and as such become elusive and unclear.

The narratives of first order ideology still had some, albeit hyperbolic, trace of reality.  For example, classes and class antagonism reflected some "social reality" which in turn had material correlates (e.g. material differences in the lives of individuals).  Or the threats of nuclear armageddon during the cold war, despite being hyperbolically narrativised in propaganda and the likes(the "war" itself purely a feedback loop between ideology manifesting materiality and materiality generating ideology), were still grounded in the material reality of large nuclear stockpiles.  Unlike zeroth order ideology (religious ideology), whose individual narrativisations (pure religion) had an understanding of being, first order ideology lost the ability to generate adequate individual narrativisations of being.  The loss of both, a world completely severed from being and the real, can be described as 2nd order ideology, hyperreal ideology, or simply as hyperreality.  Where narratives are simply signs of signs without a signified.  Where reality itself is supplanted by signs without a signified.  (As per Baudrillard) when reality itself is composed of simulacra, there is an implosion of all of social reality such that distinctions such as the economy, culture, the arts, sciences, politics, etc. merge as each is levelled to signs that are structurally no different from each other.  Thus hyperreal ideology eventually fails to be distinguished from hyperreality in general.  Where I disagree with Baudrillard is that I don't think that hyperreality has completely taken over yet, there are still people who are hyperreality-adjacent.  Hyperreal ideology, however, has at this point supplanted first order ideology in dominance.  An ideological mode that for its subjects, creates individual narrativisations that are hyperreal.  For these subjects even what is materially "real" such as basal means of production are narrativised as hyperreal, signs that supplant their reality.  While there are still subjects who are adjacent or to some degree external to hyperreal ideology, its clear that this order of ideology will dominate in time.  Once second order ideology has taken over completely, such that subjects are born into a reality that is a projection of second order ideology (recall the feedback loop between materiality and ideology, except here, ideology comes first to generate hyperreality instead of materiality), then we can say that hyperreality has replaced the real.  In fact once hyperreal ideology takes over and projects its hyperreality, there will no longer be a projector, there will be no "ideology" to speak of, and all there will be is a homogeneous soup.  This is truly the end of history, because there is no development when all that is is signs of signs begetting signs of signs.  There is no development, only permutation.  Subjects, if you can call them that, like termites building nests from the same Earth on the same plane for eternity.

Well, perhaps not for eternity.  I have hope that as long as we have an intuitive understanding of being, that perhaps those spontaneous moments of the sublime may slip through the cracks such that the hyperreal "subject" is confused, unable to adequately narrativise it.  That perhaps such a narrativisation will spark a return of pure religion and zeroth order ideology.  It's doubtful, and even so, such narratives would have a hard time competing with hyperreality.  It's highly doubtful that subjects of hyperreality would be able to craft coherent lasting narratives which do not just melt into the ocean of signs.  And finally it would not even make sense for religion to narrativise a world that is so abstracted, it is historically misplaced.  Still, I must hope that there is a stable absolute extrema where people can be most like people, not insects.  Where we are once again beings in the world.  
  
  
----

[^[1]]: In Heideggerian terms, present at handedness came to dominate over ready to handedness whereas at one time the opposite was true[^[2]].

[^[2]]: All modern philosophy is conceived and understood with this dichotomy as a backdrop inherent to reality itself (not to mention that it is inherent to the structure of modern language, which is a reflection of that reality).  This is why Heidegger is so hard to understand and why even the example Heidegger himself gives for readiness to hand is easily misinterpreted (and Heidegger himself often even implies the dichotomy when describing ideas that are preontological).  The example of the hammer is usually presented to new readers as such: "Dasein encounters the hammer ready-to-hand" or "Dasein has no conscious experience of the hammer".  But this is wrong: Dasein *just is*.  Or more accurately even remove Dasein (the subject) from the preceding example so that what's left is "just is".  There is no "from Dasein's perspective", there is no "encountering the hammer", there only is being.  Any typical articulation of ready to handedness must be aware that it is describing ready to handedness from a bird's eye view.
